# Monolith vs Microservices

### Monolith 
- A single application taht we deploy but has multiple discrete sub components. 
- Example: A Desktop Banking App: has sub componenets: Login, Showing Balance Account, Dashboard, Wire Transfer etc. 

- We deliver and package these subcompoents as a single Monolith App. We deploy it as single unit. 

- Suppose there is a bug with Wire Transfer component, we need to coordinate with rest of sub components and re-deploy the app. 

### Microservices 

- Discrete services as application. 

- Now if there is a bug in Wire Transfer, we just fix and re-deploy the Wire Transfer Mircroservice. 

- Microservices provide development agility, we no longer need to coordinate our development efforts accros many groups, we can develop services independently. 

- One Challange with microservice is Discovery 


### Discovery 

##### How do different compoenents Discover one another ?

In Monolith: Service B (Wire Transfer) simply exposes a Method/Function to Service A (Dashboard) that it can call direcly (since they are in same application). 
    - This takes nanoseconds (little to no latency)

In Microservice: Service B and Service A no longer run in same application, communication between them is done through a network. 
    - This takes milliseconds to seconds (significant latency)
    - But first how would Service A discover Service B ?

###### Approach A: Load Balancers 

We add a Load Balancer in front of every Microservice (There may be multiple instances of a single Microservice running.)

Service A has hardcoded address of Service B's Load Balancer. 

Although This distributes the load evenly among Service B instances, This introduces a few problems:

    - There are way too many load balancers among various Microservices. (Additional Cost)
    - Load Balancers are Single Points of Failure.
        - If we lost the Load Balancer at Service B, it doesn't matter how many Service B instances we have we can't connect to them. 
        - This means Effectively Service B has gone down. 
    - We are adding more latency. Instead of Service A talking directly to Service B, we now have a load balancer in between (Increased Latency).
    - Load Balancers are need to be manually managed. If a new instance of Service B is added, Load Balancer needs to be updated (which can take time). 

###### Approach B: Central Registry

To Solve these issues, We generally use a Central Service Registry (Instead of using Load Balancers)

    - Instances of Service B (or any other Service) are registered at the Central Registry.
    - Now If Service A wants to communicate to Service B, It queries the Central Registry to know where are the upstream instances of Service B (Registry basically tells A the address of a B instance)
    - Now Service A can directly communicate with a Service B instance. 
    - If one of the B instances goes down, Central Registry will pick that up and avoid returning the down service's address to Service A. 
    - Registry Can also balance the traffic load by alternatingly sending address of different instances of Service B. 

This way covers "Discovery", "Failure Detection" and "Load Leveling" as well.

This way we also don't need multiple Load Balancers at every Microservice. 


### Configuration 

- With Monoliths we can have one giant configuration and all of the subsystems have a consistent view of the configuration. 

- Example: If we put our configuration in "QA" mode, our entire application will be in QA mode. 

- With Microservices, every Microservice has a its own configuration. Every service will have a different view of its configuration. 

- Example: If we put Service A in "QA" mode, we'll have so separately provide a Service B that's in "QA" mode (and every other service.)

###### Approach: Central Key-Value Store

Just like Central Registry, We keep all the configurations in a Central Key-Value Store. 

- Configurations are set at Central Key-Value Store and then pushed out to serveral Microservices. 


### Monolith vs Microservices

- Monoliths are HUGE system (one machine runs entire system) connected directly to client (user). 
- Monoliths are scaled by having multiple machines running same monolith (system)

advantages
- Good for small teams (you cant affort time to break into microservices)
- Lesser moving parts (no need to worry about different parts)
- Less duplication of code across services
- A monolith is faster (no RPC calls) all calls are local withing same application.

disadvantages 
- can be overwhelming for new developer to get familiar with entire system. (lots of context)
- deployments are frequent and complicated. Changes to anything will require deploying whole system. 
- Single point of failure. 
- Whole monolith needs to be scaled (including even that parts that won't usually get much traffic if separate)

- Microservices are multiple system running smaller services (that are interconnected) of which few (or one) is connected to client (user). 
- A microservice is a single business unit. All data all functions which are relevant to a service are put into one microservice. 
- Microservices usually have their own dedicated databases. 
- Clients(users) are usually connected to a "gateway" and this gateway is talking to the microservices.

advantages 
- Easier to scale 
- New developers can be assigned only a particular service. 
- Parallel development is easy. (one team can work on one microservice while other team works on other microservice independently)
- It is easier to identify what is being used less and what is more. Thus: 
- You can identify scale specific microservices (eg. If you can see chat is getting more requests you can scale only the chat microservice to more servers)


disadvantages 
- Not easy to design (sometimes we break some services into a separate microservice when it shouldn't be a microservice. eg breking chat furthuer into two microservices.)
- To identify see if a service S1 is only communicating with a service S2. This implies S1 should better be a part of S2 rather than a separate microservice. 



StackOverflow uses a Monolith