# Load Balancing 


### Load Balancing is dividing requests (load) evenly among multiple (N) servers (horizontally scaled)

### Load Balancers use "Consistent Hashing" to balance load evenly. 

## What is Hashing ? 

A Hash function uses a mathematical formula that scrambles its inputted data. 

All data can be hashed (audio, images, video, text)

Hash function scrambles the binary code reprentation of the data. 

**Since Hashing is a Pure Function: Same Input will always produce the Same Output.**

*If two inputs produce that same hash. We can be confident that the two inputs are identical.*


## Simple Hashing Algo

Every request has a random ID in range 0 to M-1 

Using hashing algorithm on request r1 we get a value m1 
    - h(r1) => m1  

Upon dividing m1 by N (number of servers) we get a remainder 
    - m1%N => S 

The request is assigned to Server with number S. Servers are numbered range from 0 to N. 

IF request ID is uniformly random, we'll have balanced load. 
BUT request ID is never random, same user may send repeated requests with same ID. 

Say if we are storing some cache for request h(r1) = 6 and we have 4 servers initially, request would go to 6%4 == 2nd Server. 

The 2nd server would store some cache in case the same request h(r1) = 6 would come again. 

If we decide to scale our server to 5 server. The request h(r1) = 6 would now go to (6%5 = 1) 1st server. And the cache at 2nd server is useless now. 


## Consistent Hashing Algo

In consistent hashing we first make a conceptual **ring of hashes**

We map onto the ring:
    - the hashes of the Request IDs 
    - the hashes of the Servers 

**Each request ID will go to the Server that is _immediately clockwise_ to them**

When a new server is added, the only server that is effected is the immediate neighbour. 

*Because the hashes are uniformly random, we can expect the load to be uniformly random and on average equally balanced, However this does not always happen in practice*

It is possible to have non-disribution between servers still. 

In order to ensure a more evenly distributed load we can introduce
the idea of **Virtual Nodes**

Instead of having just one hash function we have multiple hash functions. A Server can hashed with multiple hash functions: 

    h1(50) => 20 
    h2(50) => 50 
    h3(50) => 70

This way a server can be at multiple places in the **hash ring**

_This increases the randomness of load. And when new server is added, the requests that are effected are more uniformly random._

_If one Server has higher capacity than others, we can put it through a higher number of hashing functions so that it lives in more places along the **hash ring** and thus **server more requests**._