# Content Delivery Network (CDN)

Lets imagine a **Web Server** that serves **HTML pages**. You interact with these HTML pages. 

There is also a **Database** that stores information (such as user data, session etc.)

The **Database** store **Dynamic** content. 

**Static content** such as **HTML**, **Images**, **Video**, **CSS** etc are currently served from **Web Server** (Say stored in HDD)

This works fine for a few users. 

But if we have millions (or even thousands) of **users across the globe**, this doesn't work great. 

We must remember few priciples for serving **Static Content**: 

1. **Caching** - We cache static content on **Web Server** **in-memory** (80x faster than HDD)

2. **Customized data** based on **device or location** (eg. A user on mobile will view diffent **HTML** than a user on PC, also HTML pages can vary with location (US vs India Amazon.com for example))

3. **Web Pages** must be served **Fast** 


We can introduce a **Global Cache** to store **Static Content**

This **Global Cache** is however a **Single Point Of Failure**. 

We can make this a **Distributed Cache** (Horizontally Scaled)

NOTE: Some distributed consensus are: **Paxos** and **Raft**


Since content vary based on location, we can **Shard** the **Cache** **based on location**. 

Eg. Indian users will get their pages from India part of the Cache.

**One Problem** is that the entire **Distributed Cache** is still hosted in a particular location (say USA), even if its **Sharded**. 

Indian user's request would still **go all the way to US**, just to get some static HTML page. 


To solve this issue: we **seperate out** the **caches** and **place it close to the user's location**. These caches can be **Separate Data Centers**. 


**In Distributed Systems** there is always **A Single Source Of Truth**. 

The **Web Server** will always have the **Database** and **Static Content** at a single place. 

The **Caches** must be **build/rebuilt** from this **Single Source Of Truth**. 

That's why these **Data Centers** need to be **Caches**. 


These **Data Center Caches** together are called **Content Delivery Network (CDN)**. 

A Content Delivery Network (CDN) is a **globally distributed network of proxy servers**, serving content from **locations closer to the user**

Solutions like **Akamai** and **AWS CloudFront** provide a **CDN**

**CDN** takes care of: 
1. **Hosting boxes close to User.**
2. **Follow Regulations (of the Country/Location)**. 
3. **Allow posting content in the boxes via UI**. 
4. **Also Content Invalidation via TTL (Time To Live) Config**. 

**CloudFront** uses **S3** as the **storage engine**. 

